.TH TERMINUSD 8 "March 2026" "terminusd" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
terminusd \- shutdown control for Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B terminusd
.RI [ \-c " config_path" ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B terminusd
is a lightweight daemon that gives complete control over system shutdowns,
reboots and poweroffs.
It registers a
.I delay
inhibitor lock with
.BR systemd-logind (8)
at startup and listens for the
.B PrepareForShutdown
signal on D-Bus.
When that signal fires the system is held in an active pre-shutdown state
\(em where
.BR systemctl (1)
commands still work, services can be started and stopped, and packages can
be installed \(em while
.B terminusd
executes the configured actions.
Only after all actions complete (or a critical failure aborts the run)
is the inhibitor lock released, allowing systemd to continue with
poweroff or reboot.
.PP
.B Why a delay inhibitor rather than a block inhibitor?
Block inhibitors are ignored when shutdown or reboot commands are issued
by root.
Delay inhibitors are honoured by all callers but expire after
.B InhibitDelayMaxSec
seconds (see
.BR logind.conf (5)),
providing a safe upper bound that prevents the machine from being held
indefinitely should the configured actions stall.
The inhibitor releases as soon as the actions finish, so the shutdown
window is no longer than necessary.
.PP
.B terminusd
supports two complementary features:
.TP
.I Ordered shutdown actions
Scripts, binaries, or commands are assigned a numeric
.B priority
and executed in ascending order.
Scripts sharing the same priority run in parallel, allowing faster
shutdown windows.
Any action can be marked
.B critical\c
; if a critical action exits non-zero, all remaining priority groups are
skipped, the inhibitor is released and the shutdown proceeds, preventing
half-finished maintenance states.
.TP
.I Shutdown guard
An optional always-running guard process can dynamically mask or unmask
the systemd shutdown targets
.RB ( shutdown.target ,
.BR reboot.target ,
.BR poweroff.target ,
.BR kexec.target ,
.BR halt.target )
based on runtime conditions \(em even against root.
This is useful for preventing accidental reboots during BCP or
degraded HA-cluster states.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config " " \fIPATH\fP
Path to the configuration file.
If omitted,
.I /etc/terminusd.conf
is used.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.B terminusd
uses INI-format configuration files.
The primary file is:
.TP
.I /etc/terminusd.conf
and optional drop-in files may be placed in:
.TP
.I /etc/terminus.d/
Drop-ins are loaded after the primary file in lexical filename order.
For
.B [main]
keys the last value seen wins.
For script sections, a drop-in section whose name matches an existing
section overrides the values in that section; sections with new names add
new scripts.
This design integrates cleanly with configuration management tools.
.SS "[main] section"
.TP
.B set_max_inhibit_delay
Boolean (true/false, yes/no, 1/0).
When true, the daemon writes the value of
.B max_inhibit_delay
into
.B InhibitDelayMaxSec
in
.IR /etc/systemd/logind.conf .
Default: false.
.TP
.B max_inhibit_delay
Desired
.B InhibitDelayMaxSec
value in seconds.
Choose a value large enough to cover the total expected runtime of all
configured scripts.
This is the hard safety ceiling; the inhibitor releases sooner if the
scripts finish earlier.
Only meaningful when
.B set_max_inhibit_delay = true\c
\&.
.TP
.B restart_logind_after_set
Boolean.
When true, the daemon restarts
.B systemd-logind.service
immediately after updating
.I logind.conf
so the new
.B InhibitDelayMaxSec
value takes effect without a reboot.
.B Warning:
restarting logind terminates all active login sessions.
Default: false.
.SS "Shutdown guard keys (in [main])"
.TP
.B shutdown_guard_enabled
Boolean.
Set to true to activate the shutdown guard subsystem.
Default: false.
.TP
.B shutdown_guard_command
Path to the guard executable, optionally followed by arguments.
This program is responsible for dynamically enabling or disabling
shutdowns based on runtime conditions.
.TP
.B shutdown_guard_type
.RS
.TP
.B oneshot
(default)
The guard command is executed every
.B shutdown_guard_interval
seconds.
After
.B shutdown_guard_threshold
consecutive non-zero exits the shutdown targets are masked.
They are unmasked the first time the command exits zero.
.TP
.B persist
The guard command is forked once and kept running indefinitely.
If it exits for any reason it is restarted immediately.
The process controls masking by writing directives to its stdout:
.RS
.PP
.EX
shutdown_guard_disable_shutdown 1   # disable shutdowns
shutdown_guard_disable_shutdown 0   # re-enable shutdowns
.EE
.PP
These directives may be emitted as many times as needed;
all other output is forwarded to syslog.
.RE
.RE
.TP
.B shutdown_guard_interval
Seconds between successive oneshot guard runs.
Default: 30.
Ignored in persist mode.
.TP
.B shutdown_guard_threshold
Number of consecutive non-zero exits from the guard command before
shutdown targets are masked in oneshot mode.
Default: 1.
Ignored in persist mode.
.TP
.B shutdown_guard_run_as_user
Drop privileges to this user before executing the guard process.
Optional.
.TP
.B shutdown_guard_run_as_group
Drop privileges to this group before executing the guard process.
Optional.
.TP
.B shutdown_guard_run_env
Path to a
.I KEY=VALUE
environment file sourced into the guard process environment.
Optional.
.SS "Script sections"
Every section name other than
.B [main]
defines a shutdown action.
The section name is used as a label in log messages.
.TP
.B command
Absolute path to an executable script or binary, optionally followed by
arguments.
Required.
.TP
.B priority
Unsigned integer.
Actions run in ascending order; actions with equal priority run in
parallel.
Defaults to 1000.
.TP
.B user
Drop privileges to this user before exec.
Optional.
.TP
.B group
Drop privileges to this group before exec.
Optional.
.TP
.B env
Path to a
.I KEY=VALUE
environment file.
If omitted the action inherits the daemon's environment.
Optional.
.TP
.B critical
Boolean.
If true and this action exits non-zero, all remaining priority groups are
skipped, the inhibitor is released and the shutdown proceeds immediately.
This prevents half-finished maintenance states.
Default: false.
.TP
.B enabled
Boolean.
If false this section is completely ignored and not loaded.
Default: true.
.SH "SHUTDOWN SEQUENCE"
.IP "1." 4
.B terminusd
starts and registers a delay inhibitor lock with
.BR systemd-logind (8).
.IP "2." 4
The daemon monitors D-Bus for the
.B PrepareForShutdown
signal.
If the shutdown guard is enabled, the guard process is started
concurrently and begins managing shutdown-target masking.
.IP "3." 4
When
.B PrepareForShutdown
fires, the daemon executes configured actions in ascending priority order.
Actions within the same priority group run in parallel.
.IP "4." 4
If a critical action exits non-zero, remaining groups are aborted.
.IP "5." 4
After the run completes (or is aborted), the inhibitor lock is released
and the system continues with poweroff or reboot.
.SH "LOGIND DELAY TIMEOUT"
The
.B InhibitDelayMaxSec
setting in
.BR logind.conf (5)
is a hard upper limit on how long any delay inhibitor can hold.
If the configured actions do not finish within this window the inhibitor
is released forcibly and the shutdown proceeds.
Choose a value that covers your longest expected shutdown action with
some margin.
For environments that apply firmware updates or run long package upgrades
a value of 45 minutes or more is recommended.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/terminusd.conf
Primary configuration file.
.TP
.I /etc/terminus.d/
Drop-in configuration directory.
Files in this directory are loaded in lexical order after the primary
configuration file.
.TP
.I /usr/libexec/terminusd/examples/
Directory of example scripts installed with the package:
.RS
.TP
.I example-shutdown-notify.sh
Notifies logged-in users of the pending shutdown and blocks new logins.
.TP
.I example-package-updates.sh
Runs package upgrades via
.B apt
or
.B dnf
while systemd is still fully functional.
.TP
.I example-persistent-shutdown-guard.sh
Example persist-mode guard: monitors remote IP reachability and emits
enable/disable directives to terminusd.
.TP
.I example-oneshot-shutdown-guard.sh
Example oneshot-mode guard: exits non-zero when a remote IP is
unreachable, triggering masking after the configured threshold.
.RE
.TP
.I /usr/lib/systemd/system/terminusd.service
Systemd service unit file.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS "Basic ordered shutdown actions"
Run a user-notification script first, then apply package updates.
The update step is marked critical so a failure stops further execution.
.PP
.RS
.EX
[main]
set_max_inhibit_delay = true
max_inhibit_delay = 2700

[notifyusers]
command = /usr/libexec/terminusd/examples/example-shutdown-notify.sh
priority = 100
user = root

[applyupdates]
command = /usr/libexec/terminusd/examples/example-package-updates.sh
priority = 200
critical = true
.EE
.RE
.SS "Shutdown guard — persist mode"
Prevent shutdowns while a critical upstream host is unreachable.
The guard process sends enable/disable directives via stdout.
.PP
.RS
.EX
[main]
shutdown_guard_enabled = true
shutdown_guard_type = persist
shutdown_guard_command = /usr/libexec/terminusd/examples/example-persistent-shutdown-guard.sh
shutdown_guard_run_as_user = svcacct
shutdown_guard_run_as_group = svcacct
.EE
.RE
.PP
When the upstream host becomes unreachable the guard emits:
.PP
.RS
.EX
shutdown_guard_disable_shutdown 1
.EE
.RE
.PP
All subsequent
.BR reboot (8),
.BR shutdown (8),
and
.RB ` "systemctl reboot" '
commands return
.B "Access denied"
until the guard re-emits:
.PP
.RS
.EX
shutdown_guard_disable_shutdown 0
.EE
.RE
.SS "Drop-in configuration"
Adding a new script via a drop-in (suitable for configuration management):
.PP
.RS
.EX
# /etc/terminus.d/50-cluster-failover.conf
[clusterfailover]
command = /usr/local/bin/failover-primary.sh
priority = 100
critical = true
user = clusteradm
.EE
.RE
.SH "USE CASES"
.TP
.B Installing packages safely on reboot
.B terminusd
holds the inhibitor while the system is still in a fully operational
state, meaning
.BR systemctl (1)
commands invoked by package pre/post scripts succeed.
This avoids the dual-reboot mechanic introduced by the systemd
system-update mechanism.
.TP
.B Cluster failover and preparation
Configure coordinated failover scripts that run in defined sequence,
ensuring workloads move cleanly to other nodes before the machine goes
down.
.TP
.B Preventing accidental reboots
Enable the shutdown guard during BCP events, degraded HA states, or
critical maintenance windows.
Even root-issued reboot commands are denied while the guard holds
shutdowns disabled.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR systemd-logind (8),
.BR logind.conf (5),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR reboot (8),
.BR shutdown (8)
