.TH TERMINUSCTL 8 "March 2026" "terminusd" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
terminusctl \- runtime control client for terminusd
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B terminusctl
.RI [ OPTION ]...\~ COMMAND \~ [ ARG ]
.br
.B terminusctl
.RI [ OPTION ]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B terminusctl
connects to the
.B terminusd
control socket and sends a single runtime management request.
It is intended for operators who need to inspect daemon state or change
runtime behavior without editing configuration files or restarting the
daemon.
.PP
The
.B status
output gives a full overview of the current configuration of the daemon
including an ordered overview of shutdown actions. It also allows for
overriding the system-wide shutdown disablement state or starting and
stopping the shutdown guard.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B start
Start the
.B terminusd
daemon by executing
.BR "systemctl start terminusd" .
.TP
.B stop
Stop the
.B terminusd
daemon by executing
.BR "systemctl stop terminusd" .
.TP
.B status
Show the current daemon runtime status and shutdown guard state, including a full
ordered list of shutdown actions.
.TP
.B reload-config
Reload the daemon configuration and script definitions while the daemon
remains running.
.TP
.BI "shutdown-guard " "enable|disable"
Enable or disable the shutdown guard command.
.TP
.BI "shutdown-commands " "enable|disable"
Enable or disable shutdown/reboot commands system-wide.
.TP
.B system-reboot
Request a reboot through the daemon control path.
Unless
.B --force
is provided,
.B terminusctl
prompts for confirmation first.
.TP
.B system-shutdown
Request a shutdown through the daemon control path.
Unless
.B --force
is provided,
.B terminusctl
prompts for confirmation first.
.SH OPTIONS
.B --set-logind-inhibitor-delay
Tell the daemon to write its currently configured
.B max_inhibit_delay
value into
.IR /etc/systemd/logind.conf .
This is a one-shot administrative action and does not change the daemon's
normal startup behavior for
.BR set_max_inhibit_delay .
.TP
.B -f, --force
Skip confirmation prompts for
.B system-reboot
and
.BR system-shutdown .
.TP
.B --skip-scripts
Only valid with
.B system-reboot
or
.BR system-shutdown .
Skips configured shutdown script execution for that request.
.TP
.B -h, --help
Show a short usage summary.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /run/terminusd.sock
UNIX domain control socket used by
.BR terminusctl .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B terminusctl
returns 0 on success and non-zero on communication failures, invalid
usage, or an error response from the daemon.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR terminusd (8),
.BR logind.conf (5),
.BR systemctl (1)